Forced transactions documentation (#1361)
Consensys/doc.linea: docs/network/how-to/forced-transactions.mdx

sidebar_position: 6
---

Forced transactions allow users to submit transactions directly to the Layer 1 (L1), Ethereum, that must be processed by the sequencer by a specific deadline. This system allows a processing guarantee that is enforced at finality. 

## Understand forced transactions

Forced transactions are an anti-censorhip mechanism that helps users submit transactions even when the normal L2 submission path is blocked or delayed.

When a user submits a forced transaction, they submit a signed L2 transaction to the L1, with a requirement that the sequencer processes it by a specified block deadline. 

Typically, the sequencer will process the transaction well before the deadline -- the deadline is the **latest acceptable block, not the target block**. If the sequencer fails to meet the deadline, finalization will revert.

Forced transactions are chained using a MiMC-based rolling hash. The rolling hash commits to the complete ordered sequence of forced transactions, ensuring processing and storage. This mechanism prevents skipped forced transactions, unauthorized inserted transactions, and reordering attacks.

> :::warning Transaction processing

Author: Can add more information about why a transaction might fail in a new subsection

A forced transaction can be processed by the sequencer, but still fail on the L2 for reasons such as an invalid nonce, insufficient balance, low gas limit, or contract revert.
:::

For more information about how forced transactions work, see [below](#technical-components).

### Use cases

Forced transactions support strong delivery guarantees and user trust for critical actions.

Some examples of ideal forced transaction use cases include:

- Withdrawal requests and claims
- Liquidation and risk-management actions

> - Governance operations with strict timing

Reviewer: timing is not really guaranteed here other than the deadline - this could be guaranteed governance transaction processing..

- Emergency controls and safety operations

## Enable the forced path

Forced transactions is not enabled by default. To enable forced transactions on your smart contract,...

## Submit forced transactions

To submit a forced transaction, you first need to query the latest finalized state and rolling hashes from the L1.

> Once you have the latest finalized state and rolling hashes, you can construct a transaction with the following fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have the latest finalized state and rolling hashes, you can construct an L1 forced transaction submission with the following fields:
```

- `timestamp`
- `messageNumber`
- `forcedTxNumber`
- `messageRollingHash`
- `forcedTxRollingHash`

Then, sign an EIP-1559 transaction destined for the L2:

```bash
struct Eip1559Transaction {
    uint256 nonce;
    uint256 maxPriorityFeePerGas;
    uint256 maxFeePerGas;
    uint256 gasLimit;
    address to;
    uint256 value;
    bytes input;
    AccessList[] accessList;
    uint8 yParity;
    uint256 r;
    uint256 s;
}
```

After submitting the transaction, the gateway will validate the transaction details.

## Technical components

When a user submits a forced transaction, the following components validate and process the transaction:

- `ForcedTransactionGateway`: Validates and submits the transaction to the Linea rollup.
- `LineaRollup`: Stores the transaction in the rollup and generates a rolling hash.
- Coordinator: Forwards the transaction to the sequencer for processing.
- Sequencer: Processes the transaction before the deadline.
- Prover: Generates a proof of the transaction and submits it to the finalization layer.

> When a user submits a forced transaction to the `ForcedTransactionGateway`, the gateway calculates the deadline with a buffer, sets the maximum gas allowance, and submits the transaction to the `LineaRollup`.

Reviewer: It doesn't "set" the maximum allowance - the gaslimit is defined in the EIP-1559 transaction that has been signed for execution on L2. The gateway validates that that limit is within the maximum allowed.

The Linea rollup validates the current state of the chain, and stores the transaction in a queue of forced transactions, generating a rolling hash. The rollup also enforces processing by the deadline, and calculates the required fee for the forced transaction. At this stage, the transaction is also checked by the `AddressFilter` to ensure it is an allowed transaction type.

The transaction is then sent to the coordinator, an offchain component that forwards the transaction to the sequencer for processing.

The sequencer receives the transaction and must process it before the deadline. If the transaction is not processed before the deadline, the transaction is reverted and the user's funds are returned.

> Once processed, the prover generates a proof of the transaction, computes the rolling hash, and submits the proof to the finalization layer.

Reviewer: there is no "compute" of the rolling hash as such by the prover other than indicating a range of forced transactions processed in the finalization and the corresponding rolling hash. e.g. we finalized last time forced transaction 1 with hash 0xabcd and now we are saying forced transaction 10 was the final one with rolling hash 0xbcde.

| **Insufficient Gas** | The `gasLimit` specified is too low for the transaction to complete. |
| **Insufficient Balance** | The signer doesn't have enough ETH on L2 to cover `value + (gasLimit * maxFeePerGas)`. |
| **Contract Revert** | The target contract's logic reverted the call (require failed, custom error, etc.). |
| **Out of Gas During Execution** | Complex computation exhausted the gas limit mid-execution. |
| **Invalid Signature** | Edge cases where the signature is technically valid but doesn't match L2 state. |

### Use cases

Ideal forced transaction use cases include transactions that need strong delivery guarantees, such as:

- Withdrawal requests and claims
- Liquidation and risk-management actions
- Guaranteed governance transaction processing
- Emergency controls and safety operations

## Enable the forced path

Forced transaction submission is not enabled by default. To enable forced transaction submission for your smart contract, you need to:

1. Deploy the `AddressFilter` contract 
2. Deploy the `ForcedTransactionGateway` contract

Note that the `AddressFilter` contract is also required to initiate your rollup, so you should already have it deployed.

> Once both contracts are deployed, a LineaRollup admin will grant the relevant `FORCED_TRANSACTION_SENDER_ROLE` to the `ForcedTransactionGateway` contract, allowing your contract to submit forced transactions.

Reviewer 2: Thoughts @thedarkjester

| **Invalid Signature** | Edge cases where the signature is technically valid but doesn't match L2 state. |

### Use cases

Ideal forced transaction use cases include transactions that need strong delivery guarantees, such as:

- Withdrawal requests and claims
- Liquidation and risk-management actions
- Guaranteed governance transaction processing
- Emergency controls and safety operations.

## Enable the forced path

Forced transaction submission is not enabled by default. To enable forced transaction submission for your smart contract, you need to:

1. Deploy the `AddressFilter` contract 
2. Deploy the `ForcedTransactionGateway` contract

Once both contracts are deployed, a LineaRollup admin will grant the relevant `FORCED_TRANSACTION_SENDER_ROLE` to the `ForcedTransactionGateway` contract, allowing your contract to submit forced transactions.

## Submit a forced transaction

To submit a forced transaction, you first need to query the latest finalized state and rolling hashes from the L1.

Once you have the latest finalized state and rolling hashes, you can construct an L1 forced transaction submission with the following fields:

> LastFinalizedState:

Author: updated this
